This edition of the SEO foro to London
read is going to be dedicated to the AI
mode. Google released earlier this week
at their Google IO event officially
launching AI mode for search in the US.
But additionally, they announced the
evolution that will come with AI mode
with the additional features and
personalizations that AI mode will bring
in the future that they will start
testing too. and to go through all of
the announcements, resources, guides,
and commentary that have happened in the
latest days related to the AI mode. I
have invited today my good friend Januka
Furelli, who's also an SEO consultant.
Hi Ela. Hi everybody. Before starting to
go through the latest news, I want to
thank Similar Web who's our today's
episode sponsor. Now, let's go through
the announcement. In May 20, we saw
Google releasing in public AI mode in
search. AI mode had been already tested
in labs. I had already covered a few
early observations about the new Google
AI mode going through how it is really
an evolution of AI overviews that is
pretty much here a bridge for Google. So
whenever there is an AI overviews
showcased to the user at the top of the
SERs, there will be now a button at the
bottom allowing the user to dig more
about the topic that he's researching
and taken to a new screen that is pretty
much LLM first very similar to what we
have seen so far with Gemini or Chad
GBT. So Google has now released this
live to everybody in the US. So,
Janluca, I know that there were a lot of
reactions going on in the community,
even some headlines about how this is
the SEO AI apocalypse. But
realistically, considering that at least
right now, AI mode will be pretty much
endorse or showcase or refer to those
who actually get an AI overview in the
first place to continue their search
journey or their discovery journey. We
can expect the users that end up getting
impacted are a subset of those that end
up getting the AI overviews which are at
the moment as we know prominently shown
for
majorlyformational queries. a lot of
branded queries, navigational queries,
factual related queries rather than
commercially money-making queries which
by the way we know that Google is also
announcing major upcoming features
related to AI but not necessarily here
yet. So what we can expect as an impact
right now is this. I think we should
note in our Google Analytics especially
and with extension also on Google search
console in order to see if there is a
further decrease in clicks because
people clicking on the CTA in overview
to go explore deeper with AI mode
because sincerely if we think to the tab
AI mode there is the behavior of the
people to go default. We see it with
news all the other filters people
usually don't click on them. That that
is a really good point. Thank you for
bringing that up. There is another way
in fact indeed that you can go to the AI
mode which is through the tab here at
the top as we can see of the screen that
it is shown to the left of the old tab
where we are. But indeed we already see
how those users that go to the image tab
or the video tabs are a minority and
pretty much trivial in comparison. And
thank you very much for bringing up the
topic about measuring the impact. The
first to highlight this was Tom Critloow
then validated by Patri stocks and I
also double check that the sidebar links
showcase in AI mode which actually links
to the site where the information is
coming from are adding a not refer. This
not refer will won't send the referral
information and it won't allow us to
track it accurately in any analytic
systems that we use and will be added as
a direct traffic in our analytic. An
update to the no referer issue from the
AI mode links. John Mueller has now
clarified that this is indeed a bug and
since there's a long weekend coming up,
they haven't yet fixed it, but a fix is
coming. So we can expect this no refer
to be removed to be able to properly
track and attribute this traffic in your
analytics platform. He also clarified
that it's not yet live in the search
console but is upcoming. However, he
also follow up saying for the sake of
clarity the reporting that is planned to
be added in the search console is like
the one that already exists for AIO
meaning that it won't be separate or
break out and no API change will be
involved. So what I recommend you to do
in the meantime to start measuring the
impact of AI mode in the US right now is
to add an annotation to the release date
in your analytics platform May 20th.
Start comparing your before and after in
organic search traffic. Look for
negative shift and compare also the
before and after of the direct traffic
where it is right now being attributed
to and look for any increasing shift
there. Also, since John Mueller already
clarified that they will start taking
into account AI mode traffic in the
Google search console, but without
splitting it in a similar way that they
do with AI overviews, I will highly
recommend you to start configuring your
analytics platform to start tracking AI
overviews along with other features that
will likely also allow you to track AI
mode when the new refer is fixed. go and
take a look to Dana's guide where she
doesn't only describe a step by step but
also has filmed a video here. I will
highly highly recommend in any case to
keep close attention to the changes that
they are doing because one of the things
that it was clear from Barry coverage
and the coverage from a few SEOs who
were in attendance at the Google IO
event and the announcements that they
made over their live stream was that
they are testing a lot of this right
Januka we were chatting about this it
seems that whatever we see right now we
need to take it with a grain of salt. I
think it says a lot that they have only
launched also in the US and my feeling
is that a little bit of what has
happened with AI overview so far
depending on the let's say experience
and results that they see from users
they will showcase this more in
particular also depending on the
performance very likely they see on the
ads that they also announced the day
later with the Google marketing live
event for which they actually published
this very comprehensive and detailed
document here that I am featuring on
screen where they pretty much go through
how advertisers can showcase their ad on
a much more granular basis and have all
the control in AI overview and AI mode
as you can see here. So I expect that if
for some reason we cannot get direct
data from the Google search console at
least if we work with clients that have
paid campaign in Google we can get this
information through paid campaigns. It
was very noticeable let's say obvious
how Google waited until having a very
refined ads offering to integrate in AI
overviews and AI mode to start releasing
it in public because at the end of the
day this is the business model. they
make money out of ads and it will depend
also on the performance they see on this
and the impact they see on this that
they will start shifting more to show it
more prominently and into more markets
right yes totally I think that this is
also the big difference between AI mode
AI overview so Google and its
competitors their competitors still
haven't found a way to monetize their
answer another thing that was said
Google IO is that essentially in this
moment similar to a sort of alpha test.
So it's pushed live in the US probably
in a few months in other English-sp
speakaking countries to retrieve tons of
data in order to then eventually make it
something better. And one thing that
they said was that each time we are
going to test features on AI mode, we'll
push them on AI overview. So this is an
important things to remember that AI
mode and AI overview are substantially
the same and are going to be even more
the same thing. Something also
interesting is that along with the
announcements of AI mode, Google also
released this new documentation, new
guidance of top ways to ensure your
content perform well in Google AI
experiences on search. And honestly, it
doesn't necessarily disclose something
completely new. Focus on unique,
valuable content for people. Provide a
great page experience. Ensure we can
access your content. Colability
indexibility. Manage visibility with
preview controls in case you don't want
to showcase certain information there.
Make sure structure data matches the
visible content. Go beyond text for
multimodel success. Video photos.
Understand the full value of your
visits. I think that this bit here is
what is actually more meaningful in this
document in this guidance because pretty
much warn us that we shouldn't assess
the value that we get from Google in
this case from AI search related
presence through visits right because
they expect that the visits are more
engaged but if you read through lines
this also means is that there will be
not as many visits as we have had so far
in traditional search results. So we
knew that for a lot different type of
sites like transactional oriented sites,
e-commerce, marketplaces, SAS businesses
and so on. Uh this was true. traffic was
only just another metric. But
realistically for a certain type of
businesses in particular publications
that for them they make money out of
impressions of the adverts that they
showcase in their website this might be
not necessarily that easy to do will
directly harm let's say traditional
business model. I want to warn users
that this is pretty much the first
implication that we will see that we
have already started to see with AI
overviews. Like if the intent of the
user was very informational, very
factual and they are satisfied with the
explanation of the AI overview, they
won't engage as much they won't click as
much. Right? However, now with AI mode,
we potentially will see this much more
at an exponential level because the
interface will be a conversational that
will incentivize the user to continue
their journey there rather than going to
the website. Right? So what will be
important here and I believe this
connects with what I had already shared
in previous guides and presentations too
is that the real difference will be in
user behavior. In traditional search, we
had this typically short keyword-based
very transactional and commercially
focused queries. And now with AI mode
and LLMs in general, we see that the
queries are different. The intent is
different. It's multi-turn and
conversational. So realistically
eventually at some point maybe not
necessarily at the beginning what it
will be important here will be to
understand the difference in search
behavior in order to diversify our
content strategy and start targeting
more and more in a different ways those
queries that we see that are important
that are actually relevant for which it
actually fulfills a need and is worthy
to target to connect to LLMs which might
defer to the ones that we target in
traditional search totally the
difference are there even if there are
many things that's still the same but
there are difference and it's more
really to say it in one phrase it you
must own the topic actually Microsoft
also showcase their own next level
strategies for marketers for AI power
search we can see that in their case I
love how it was actually a little bit
more actionable enhancing search quality
and user experience planning for AI
search Perform a comprehensive content
audit. Create an AI focused content
calendar. Target high intent queries.
Focus on content that addresses user
needs at all stage of the customer
journey. So realistically, this doesn't
change as much what we should be doing
in any case so far. I actually cover it
before in this guide showcasing what
changes with AI mode and with LLMs.
Januka, you actually also share a couple
of guides very comprehensive about this.
One is a guide to semantics on how to be
visible for both in search and LLMs,
showcasing the importance of pretty much
owning a topic, right? Like from
defining the onology of the domain of
the website, defining the entities,
developing the whole cluster for the
area of expertise, providing very
actionable examples. I think that it's
different in the mindset if we think in
terms of semantics and so optimizing for
AI search can give us more power in some
sense because before you were optimizing
for instance an architecture was
something that sometimes we were coming
after. Now we are key in this sense
because the first things we should do is
if we want to own a topic in all the
customer journey in all the potential
search journeys the first thing that we
must organize is an architecture and
from there going down down down up to
the single content level. So this is the
biggest shift for me and then it's a
shift also in terms of finally
considering that people as he was saying
the search behavior has changed we must
always think in what's next what's next
what is the next potential things that
our audience our target can ask that is
why it is so important to have that
information from LLMs right so it's not
only Google by the way to have chat GPT
and other LLMs to provide a report like
the ones that we have in Google search
console to understand which are the
queries which are the topics and the
type of visibility that our websites get
there by the way and I don't only
mention them here because they are are
today's sponsor but also because it's
pretty much the only platform that I
have seen so far given this information
similar web has this AI chatbot traffic
report here in which they don't only
disclose the AI chatbot traffic over
time for any website and the pages that
they are referring visits to, but they
actually showcase the top prompts of
each of the pages, right? And you can
definitely see how the behavior of these
promps are very very different than the
ones that these pages will tend to get
from traditional search results. So,
this is something to also take into
account. So if you want to learn more
about how to optimize for LLMs and AI
mode, take a look at these resources,
these guides to semantics and how to be
visible both in search and LMS by
Yanluka. And this other resource Jan
Luca that you have created I think is
also interesting because you provide
actionable ways for certain type of
publications that rely on ads to let's
say evolve over time and how it will be
possible for them to migrate the type of
strategy that they're following right
now for traditional search for AI mode
in order to make it ROI positive too at
the end of the day mentioning how there
should be other ways is ideally for them
to monetize the user rather than purely
impressions and traffic because that is
something that obviously unfortunately
is going to decrease and this is
something that I was actually discussing
with a client yesterday the announcement
in their case there are highly
transactional they are marketplace many
of the queries for which they are
showcased right now in AI overviews have
minimal value for them through their
customer journey and the ones that where
they are showcased
that are actually valuable for them are
the ones that are brand oriented, right?
Like those where the users are comparing
them versus their competitors just
before the transaction and for which the
user will in any case go to any website
and finish the conversion rather than
staying in any AI overview or any AI
mode because their need is not
satisfying in there. But that is a
certain type of player here. There are
other players like publications where
their content, their information is
their core value, their core product
that will need to diversify on how they
make their revenue potentially more
unfortunately payw wall content too. And
you mentioned here additional ways for
them to get visibility and get that
traffic coming right newsletter podcast
and YouTube communities merchandising
and digital goods. I love to hear more
about this publisher especially I'm not
talking of big news website I'm talking
of a publisher that were also hit by HC
for instance that kind of publisher and
AI overview and I mode in their case
forformational queries it's becoming an
awareness surface it's not becoming a
surface where they can obtain traffic is
going to be minimal from there and we
notice we know from the any screenshot
that people is sharing. It's an
awareness as it is an Instagram timeline
as the Facebook timeline where news are
shared. It's the same thing we as a
publication are always present there. we
are going to be considered by the user
as a source that it matters and consider
if people is interacting and that's why
I was saying we should try if we are
this kind of publication to do
everything we can in order to retain
this user offering them possibility via
newsletter creating community engaging
them but also offering them content
which is stronger and bigger and that
can retain them than just the classic
answer that an AI overview can offer. So
it's a way a sort of loop that can retro
be element itself. You are creating your
community a community recognize you on
AI overview click on you return etc etc.
I think that is surely complicated to be
tested but if you don't do this and
maybe this is a kind of strategy that
should have been done before with the
same start and growing of a zero click
ser phenomenon. this can be a a possible
alternative. It's also important to know
that this is just the next step, right?
This is definitely just the beginning of
what AI mode will end up being and we
can expect in a few months, right?
Google also announced deep search in AI
mode to help you with further much more
in-depth research like capabilities in
search for realtime help agentic
capabilities to do the work for you and
in particular they announced how the
first integrations will be to buy
tickets or do restaurants reservations
and all of these features will be
initially in test to validate until it
is finally released. But Google I
believe that is already showcasing how
this is just the start. How they are
definitely just setting the base with
first the release of AR mode to make it
much more powerful. Another thing that
they also disclosed was how they will
start also embedding and personalizing
more the experience of AI mode to make
it more aligned to transactional and
shopping experiences that are going to
be powered by all of the product listing
that they already have in the shopping
graph which makes complete sense because
the UI the AI overviews or UI so far has
been so suboptimal for it and that is
one of the reasons why probably they
haven't been showcasing product related
information in AI overviews and AI
overviews have been prominently focused
on pretty muchformational queries right
but it's also upcoming again this is not
going to be launched right now but it
will start to get tested the same with
personal context Google will start
personalizing the suggestions based on
past searches and this is again
something that is true that in
traditional search results if we are
logged in Our results are also
personalized. But this takes
personalization to the next level also
with information that can be obtained by
connecting with other apps like for
example Gmail. Also related to shopping
and also to the publisher. For instance,
we were talking before personalization
bring us to one thing that really really
must stand in our work. We must work on
these other two metrics. memorability
and attention because if we are creating
a content which is memorable and able to
catch the attention of our audience then
we are going to be used in the
personalized search and so this is how
we can also a small publisher also a
small e-commerce
etc etc etc can be becoming visible.
Thank you for bringing memorability and
attention because this has actually to
do with brand brand visibility and
recognition. I actually presented about
this topic and you can get the deck here
and I will be expanding and refining
this much more also taking more into
account what we see in AI search. Yes,
it's only going to become much more
important also thanks to this additional
features that will be integrated in AI
mode. Again, all of these were only
announced, are not going to be released
right now, are going to start to get
tested. So, yes, we can see already a
little bit of the mid future out there
is fundamental for us to get prepared. I
highly recommend you to go through all
of these resources, all of these guides,
John Lucas guides here that are also
very actionable. all of this insights
about what are the differences, what are
the gaps and commonalities of optimizing
for traditional search versus LLMs,
putting more efforts into your brand,
better understanding the crawling
behavior, the prompts behavior of AI
chatbot traffic and hopefully getting a
little bit more insights from Google and
if not to use even thirdparty platforms
like similar web for example that
provides these additional insights are
unfortunately not yet available for
Google. I want to finish our today's
episode sharing also how if you want to
keep updated pretty much in real time on
all the latest AI search related news
and releases to go and take a look at
the SEO for more news where these are
pretty much submitted upvoted and
commented by the community. You can also
install the Chrome extensions that is
completely free to get alerted whenever
something new is submitted. And I want
to thank Januka today for your
contribution, your commentary, provide
additional context, additional insights.
I really appreciate it. Hopefully this
will provide more in-depth view of what
has been going on this week with Imote.
It's important to put things in context.
This is the base of the next step for
sure. And as you can see, we have
already resources and we have the
knowhow and we have experience to
succeed in this new reality if we do
things well, which I expect that we do
if we focus on the broader strategies
rather than the specific tactics and one
trick ponic type of actions that could
have worked so far but will not in the
future. Thank you very much and remember
to subscribe to SEO to keep updated too
if you haven't yet. Until the next
edition, bye-bye.